0 A survey of African civilizations from 4500 B.C. to present. Analysis of traditional social systems. Discussion of the impact of European colonization on these civilizations. Analysis of the influence of traditional African social systems on modern African institutions as well as discussion of contemporary processes of Africanization.
0 The course examines important aspects of African American life and thought which are reflected in African American literature, drama, music and art. Beginning with the cultural heritage of slavery, the course surveys the changing modes of black creative expression from the 19th-century to the present.
0 Introduction to theory and practice of writing fiction, drama and poetry, with an emphasis on African American literary models. Critical reading, exercises and workshop discussions with continual reference to modeling, drafting, and revising as necessary stages in a creative process.
0 Introduces African American Studies majors to the basic research skills, methodologies, sources, and repositories for studying African Diaspora. Students will be required to select a research topic, write a research proposal, develop an annotated bibliography, and in the process will be prepared for completing their senior thesis or other significant writing projects necessary to fulfill the requirements of the major.
0 An introductory multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary educational experience to explore issues relevant to black life, cultural experiences, and political, economic, and artistic development.
0 An introductory multi-disciplinary academic exploration of the cultural, political, and economic issues relevant to Africans and African-Americans.
0 Development and application of the tools needed for examining the effectiveness of alternative policy options confronting minority communities. Review policy research methods used in forming and evaluating policies. Examination of the policy process.
0 Introduction to statistics and database processing software used in model estimation and simulation in policy analysis. Special emphasis on applications for applied research on policy problems confronting minority communities.
0 Theories and concepts in the social and behavioral sciences relating to problems in minority communities. Issues include validity and soundness of theoretical arguments, epistemological questions of various methodologies and the relationship between policy making and policy research.
0 The relationship of the slave trade of Africans to the development of British capitalism and its industrial revolution; and to the economic and social development of the Americas.
0 A comparative approach to the study of the social and cultural effects of colonization and racism on black people in Africa, Latin America and in the United States--community and family life, religion, economic institutions, education and artistic expression.
0 Black American women's history is examined from slavery to the present. The principal focus of the readings discussions and student assignments will be based upon gaining a fuller understanding of the effect of race, class and gender on the life cycles and multiple roles of Black women as mothers, daughters, wives, workers and social change agents. A variety of primary source materials on black women's experiences will be utilized.
0 Survey of the twentieth century civil rights movement from the desegregation of UM Law School through the National Black Political Congress in Gary in 1972. Major themes include leadership, legal and constitutional challenges, non-violence, Black Power, and Pan-Africanism.
0 Introduction to quantitative methods for African American Studies majors in the cultural and social analysis concentration. Basics of survey design and experimental design and data analysis and use of statistical software programs.
0 A research seminar that allows African American Studies majors to complete an independent study research project in lieu of completing the Senior Thesis. Students will examine various concepts of race, gender, labor and ethnicity in the seminar lecture component to be applied toward their specific research projects.
0 The aggregate experience of Asian Pacific Americans, from developments in the countries of origin to their contemporary issues. The histories of Asian Pacific American groups as well as culture, politics, the media, and stereotypes, viewed from an interdisciplinary perspective.
0 Introduction to the history of Asian Americans and Asians in the United States and the Americas and to the field of Asian American Studies, from an interdisciplinary perspective. Topics include theories of race and ethnicity; Asian migration and diaspora to the Americas; Asian American work and labor issues; gender, family, and communities; nationalism and nativism, and anti-Asian movements; Asian Americans in World War II, the Cold War, and the issues in the civil rights & post-civil rights era.
0 The history of immigration and the development of diverse populations in the United States are examined. Topics include related political controversies, the social experiences of immigrants, ethnicity, generations, migration, inter-group relations, race and diversity in American culture.
0 A survey of Asian American literature with an emphasis on recurrent themes and historical context.
0 An introductory multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary educational experience to explore issues relevant to Asian American life, cultural experiences; and political, economic, and artistic development.
0 Field experience/internship in professional organizations and appropriate private and governmental agencies serving the Asian American community.
0 Career and professional opportunities. Overview of and field work in professional organizations and appropriate private and governmental agencies serving the Asian American community.
0 Examine the structures and patterns of everyday life in the U.S., utilizing methods such as ethnography, oral history, survey research, and textual, visual, and material cultural analysis.
0 An introduction to American popular culture, its historical development, and its role as a reflection of and influence on our culture and society.
0 Exploration of the American film from a historical perspective, illustrating the motion picture's role as an institutional phenomenon, as a form of communication, and as a source of cross-cultural study.
0 Historical survey of American material culture. Ways of describing and interpreting accumulated material evidence (e.g., buildings, town plans) introduced by stressing relationship between artifact and culture.
0 World views, values, and social systems of contemporary American cultures explored through readings on selected groups such as middle-class suburbanites, old order Amish, and urban tramps.
0 Historical and contemporary technological innovations in American society, with special emphasis on the humanities. Varied social and cultural responses to one contemporary technological issue e.g. (environmental pollution, genetic engineering, communications technology, and psychopharmacology).
0 Exploration of the role of diversity in the shaping of American culture. Special emphasis will be placed on the multicultural origins of American popular and material culture, such as foodways and entertainment, and on the experience of "Americanization."
0 Examines the ways in which content and form of public information interact with the culture, families & individuals.
0 Cultural study of a specific theme or issue involving artifacts and documents from both past and contemporary American experience.
0 Analysis of the cultural aspect of identity formation and the role of individual or community identities in cultural production. Examination of cultural texts such as film, literature, fashion, artifacts, archival records, architecture, monuments, sports, and paintings.
0 Introduction to the process of interdisciplinary research, including research literatures, questions, first-hand sources and library and analytic methods in American Studies. Each student will craft a prospectus for original research.
0 Human biological evolution, including the biology of contemporary human groups, non-human primate social behavior, and the fossil, biochemical, and molecular evidence for human evolution. Includes a laboratory study of human population genetics, biochemical variation, and anatomical diversity in modern and fossil human and non-human primate groups.
0 Provides a brief history of forensic sciences, an introduction to some of the techniques used, and a demonstration of some of the applications of forensic sciences. A survey course designed to give the student some exposure to the kinds of scientific knowledge and techniques applied to the medico-legal investigation of death and other crimes.
0 An introduction to the evolution of human physiology and human behavior, the relationship between hominid and non-hominid primates, and the study of relationships between a population of humans and their biophysical environment.
0 Exploration of the variety of past human societies and cultures through archaeology, from the emergence of anatomically modern humans to the more recent historical past.
0 Archaeologists, scholars who study the cultures of previous times, are continually asked to evaluate the evidence for competing stories about the past. This shows how archaeologists use a critical lens and rigorous methods to assess these claims. Students will learn how the archaeological record is formed and transformed, how archaeologists date sites and objects, how they understand ancient environments, and how they can uncover gender, ethnicity, and nationality in artifactual remains.
0 Culture and social relationships in a wide variety of settings from small-scale to complex societies. An overview of how anthropology analyzes human behavior. Particular attention to the relationship between language and culture.
0 Cultural anthropology is the study of human societies. The principles of cultural anthropology are used to explore the lifeways of various cultures throughout the world. Of particular concern will be the diversity and similarities of different cultures and how anthropologists attempt to understand and compare them.
0 Utilizing ethnographic work from across the world, students will examine gender constructs across several cultures. The primary focus will be the role of women as gendered actors and participants in their day-to-day lives. Students will develop understandings of gender as distinct from the biological categories of sex, and to gain a working knowledge of variability and similarity in gender across cultural systems.
0 An overview of sexuality from an anthropological perspective, looking at aspects of sexuality within our own culture and in cultures around the world. Course topics include the biology and culture of sex, gender, physical attraction, sexual orientation, marriage and mating taboos, fertility control, sexually transmitted diseases, and commercial aspects of sex.
0 An examination of the phenomenon of international migration, or immigration. Students develop awareness of how immigration has been framed in the general public and examined by social science disciplines, most prominently anthropology. Examination of case studies of different immigrant groups in distinct geographic contexts will illuminate the varied incorporation experiences of immigrants into U.S. society.
0 An overview of the growing field of global health including health care systems, medical practices, ideas about illness in cross-cultural contexts, issues of health development, global health inequity, and human rights issues. The course will focus on the history of global health, the critique of major international health agencies and their development paradigms, and the political economy of social inequalities and health.
0 Explore past, present, and future interactions between humans and climate. Discussions, methods-oriented activities, and case study analyses provide students a foundation for appreciating the role of anthropology in understanding, responding to, and preparing for climate change.
0 Theoretical and methodological overview of biological anthropology, including evolutionary anthropology, anthropological genetics, physiological anthropology, human biology, primatology, paleoanthropology, human biodiversity, and contemporary selective challenges to modern humanity. Emphasis on core concepts and their research applications.
0 A theoretical consideration of ecological anthropology, focusing on issues related to cooperation, the management of common property, resilience, and sustainability. Explores the methods of sociocultural anthropology, including ethnology, evolutionary game theory and agent-based modeling; and natural-science approaches including behavioral and systems ecology.
0 Theory, method, and practice which guides modern anthropological archaeology. Includes research design and execution (from survey through excavation and interpretation), the reconstruction of aspects of past cultures, and the understanding of cultural change and meaning.
0 Theoretical approaches and research methods in sociocultural anthropology. Emphasis on current debates, new directions, and their historical antecedents.
0 Comparative study of religion in social, cultural, political, and economic context. Combines the history of schools of interpretation with a survey of theoretical alternatives and a focus on selected case studies.
0 An examination of how indigenous people of the New World have been presented to film audiences of the world. Development of an ethnographic understanding of Native Americans via the use of videos, films, and classroom discussion.
0 Peoples and cultures of a particular region of the world, on the basis of ethnographies, archaeological evidence, and relevant works by social historians and political economists. The regional focus and thematic emphasis will vary by semester.
0 Examines the material culture and visual expressions of Mediterranean and European societies from early times until ca. 1300 CE, emphasizing the political, social, and religious context of the works studied, the relationships of the works to the societies that created them, and the interrelationship of these societies.
0 Examines representative European and American works of art from the later Middle Ages to the present, highlighting the dynamic exchange between artistic and cultural traditions both within periods and across time.
0 Surveys major arts and architecture of the pre-Columbian world, including Mesoamerican and Andean cultures from the earliest known civilizations through European contact and conquest. Acquaints students with the monumental architecture, urban planning, painting, sculpture, and portable arts of the ancient Americas.
0 Explores the origins and evolution of art in the modern American world, from the late colonial era to the present, comparing major artistic movements and their historical contexts. Considers the diversity of art across Latin America and the United States, and the ways in which artworks mediate social, ethnic, political, and national identities.
0 A comparative study of art and material culture from various regions of the African continent. Looking across ethnic and national boundaries, considers the many relevant political, social, and religious contexts.
0 A comparative, interrelational study of the different visual arts and material cultures produced by societies in Asia. An examination of the historical traditions and forms in political, social, and religious contexts.
0 Sites and monuments of painting, sculpture, architecture, and the minor arts of ancient Egypt from earliest times through the Roman conquest. Emphasis on the pharaonic period.
0 Sites and monuments of painting, sculpture, architecture, and the minor arts of Crete, the Cycladic islands, and the Greek mainland from the earliest times to the downfall of the Mycenaean empire.
0 Sites and monuments of painting, sculpture, architecture, and the minor arts from the Geometric through the Hellenistic period with emphasis on mainland Greece in the Archaic and Classical periods.
0 Sites and monuments of painting, sculpture, architecture, and the minor arts from the earliest times through the third century A.D. with emphasis on the Italian peninsula from the Etruscan period through that of Imperial Rome.
0 Painting, sculpture, architecture, and the minor arts from the early third century through the sixth century A.D.
0 Painting, sculpture, architecture, and the minor arts from the seventh century to 1453 A.D.
0 Painting, sculpture and architecture in Western Europe, ca. 500-1150.
0 The art of northern Europe with an emphasis on painting in the Netherlands and France.
0 Painting in France, Germany, England, and the Low Countries during the Renaissance and Reformation.
0 Painting, sculpture, architecture, and the decorative arts of the fifteenth century in Italy.
0 Painting, sculpture, architecture, and the decorative arts of the sixteenth century in Italy.
0 Painting, sculpture and architecture concentrating on Italy, Spain, France, and England.
0 Painting, sculpture and architecture in seventeenth-century Netherlands.
0 From the Rococo to Neo-classicism, major developments in painting, architecture, sculpture, and the landscape garden in eighteenth-century France, England, Italy, Spain, and Germany.
0 Major trends from Neo-Classicism to Romanticism through an interdisciplinary perspective with an emphasis on historical context.
0 Major trends from Realism and Impressionism to Symbolism, exploring the historical context, in which concepts of gender, class, and race are integral to the transformation of Western art.
0 Painting, sculpture, and architecture in Europe and America from the late nineteenth century to the end of World War II.
0 Visual art since 1945, with an emphasis on North America and Europe.
0 An exploration of the historical, social, aesthetic, and technological developments of the photographic medium and its relationship to other modes of visual representation in the creation of the modern world.
0 The study of film as a visual art, from theoretical, cultural and aesthetic perspectives. Content varies by semester.
0 Painting, sculpture, architecture, and decorative arts in North America from the colonial period to 1876.
0 Painting, sculpture, architecture, and the decorative arts in North America after 1876.
0 Surveys and evaluates the art and visual culture of African Americans from 1900 to the present.
0 Pre-Hispanic painting, sculpture, and architecture, with a focus on the major archaeological monuments of Mexico.
0 The effect of mingling European visual ideas with pre-Hispanic traditions. The formation of Latin American colonial art. How Native American people transformed European ideas and forms.
0 Painting and sculpture in Latin America, with an emphasis on avant-garde movements in Mexico City, Havana, Buenos Aires, Sao Paulo, and Rio de Janeiro.
0 Visual arts and architecture in Latin America from local and international perspectives. Emphasis on late modernist and post-modern practices including geometric abstraction, pop, conceptualism, performance art, and installation art.
0 Art of the African continent from rock art through the nineteenth century. The cultural meaning of painting, sculpture, architecture, and artifacts from major archaeological sites.
0 Art styles among the segmentary, centralized, and nomadic people of Africa. The iconography and function of their art and its relationship to their various societies, cults and ceremonies.
0 A survey of the African-inflected arts around the world, focusing on such countries as Brazil, Haiti, Cuba and the United States
0 Thematically-focused topics in painting, sculpture, architecture and decorative arts of early and medieval Japan, from 5000 BC to 1500 AD.
0 Thematically-focused topics in the painting, sculpture, architecture, gardens and decorative arts of early modern, modern and contemporary Japan, from 1500 to present.
0 A chronological survey of Chinese painting, sculpture, and the applied arts.
0 Selections in translation of Greek literature from Homer to Lucian, with special emphasis on epic and dramatic poetry. No knowledge of Greek or Latin is required.
0 Selections in translation of Latin literature to the time of Apuleius. Special emphasis will be placed on poetry of the Augustan Age. No knowledge of Latin is required.
0 A Study Abroad course which introduces students to the topography, archaeology and culture of the ancient Mediterranean world.
0 The origins and development of philosophy and science in Ancient Greece, focusing on the pre-Socratics, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle.
0 The origin and evolution of athletics in ancient Greece and Rome studied as recreation, as play, as education, as a profession and as mass entertainment.
0 A study of women's image and reality in ancient Greek and Roman societies through an examination of literary, linguistic, historical, legal and artistic evidence; special emphasis in women's role in the family, views of female sexuality, and the place of women in creative art. Readings in primary sources in translation and modern critical writings.
0 Survey of Greek religious ideas and practices as they evolve from the Bronze Age to the early Christian period.
0 Survey of the major institutions of Roman state and private religion and of the diverse religions, including Judaism and Christianity, practiced in the Roman empire.
0 The role which Greek and Roman Myths have played in American culture and politics.
0 Study and analysis of the tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides with special attention to the concepts of character and of thought as conceived by Aristotle in The Poetics.
0 Representative plays by Aristophanes, Menander, Plautus and Terence in translation; examination of Greek tradition in Roman and postclassical periods.
0 Wide range of texts, genres, and themes from ancient and medieval Western traditions. Study of cultural, historical, and artistic forces shaping traditions, and the influence and relevance of those traditions to life in twenty-first century.
0 Wide range of texts from the Renaissance to the 21st century. Themes and literary techniques in the evolution of Western literature. Print publication, industrialization, questioning of religious, political, intellectual, and cultural authority.
0 Shakespeare's poems, history plays, comedies, and tragedies as investigations into language use, governance, sexuality, ethics, and mortality.
0 Surveys medieval and early modern literary works written in England. Readings may include Beowulf, Chaucer, Spenser, Mary Wroth, Milton; eighteenth-century satire, drama, novels.
0 Surveys the major literary movements of the period, from Romantic to Victorian to Modern. Such authors as Wordsworth, Keats, Bronte, Tennyson, Browning, Yeats, Joyce, Woolf.
0 Surveys American writing from the founding of the colonies through the Civil War. Authors such as Taylor, Cooper, Poe, Dickinson.
0 Surveys American writing from the Civil War through the Cold War. Authors such as Clemens, Frost, Hurston, Bellow.
0 A survey of Asian American literatures with an emphasis on recurrent themes and historical context.
0 An exploration of the stories black authors tell about themselves, their communities, and the nation as informed by time and place, gender, sexuality, and class. African American perspective themes such as art, childhood, sexuality, marriage, alienation and mortality, as well as representations of slavery, Reconstruction, racial violence and the Nadir, legalized racism and segregation, black patriotism and black ex-patriots, the optimism of integration, and the prospects of a post-racial America.
0 Readings in the novel, short story, poetry and drama.
0 An exploration of what the novel does that cannot be done by film, by television, by cell-phone screens, by any stream of images, or by textual excerpts pulled up for a quick read. The different ways of the novel, with particular focus on the process of thinking and the developed consciousness. The novel as a machine to think with and an irreplaceable model of complex human thought. Study of how thought is presented in radically different ways in novels that cross lines of class, gender, chronology, and nationality.
0 An exploration of arguably the most complex, profound, and ubiquitous expression of human experience. Study through close reading of significant forms and conventions of Western poetic tradition. Poetry's roots in oral and folk traditions and connections to popular song forms.
0 Exploration of drama through a consideration of plot, narrative flow, analytical flow, staging, performance, manuscript and printing history, text and textual change over time, and interpretation. Plays will be approached as public attempts to understand what it means to be alive.
0 Restriction: Must not have completed FILM245. Also offered as: FILM245. Credit only granted for: CMLT214, CMLT245, ENGL245, or FILM245. Formerly: CMLT214. Introduction to film as art form and how films create meaning. Basic film terminology; fundamental principles of film form, film narrative, and film history. Examination of film technique and style over past one hundred years. Social and economic functions of film within broader institutional, economic, and cultural contexts.
0 A survey of the genre, with a focus on significant elements, such as plot, character, description, style, and theme. Readings will be drawn from a range of cultures and communities.
0 Explores literary and cultural expressions by women and their receptions within a range of historical periods and genres. Topics such as what does a woman need in order to write, what role does gender play in the production, consumption, and interpretation of texts, and to what extent do women comprise a distinct literary subculture. Interpretation of texts will be guided by feminist and gender theory, ways of reading that have emerged as important to literary studies over the last four decades.
0 Examines science and technology through the lens of British and American literature, primarily between 1800 and the present. Readings from early natural and experimental philosophers of the Scientific Revolution and Enlightenment. How literary works represent the ethics of science and technology; beneficial developments of science, and also heavy toll of industrialization. Writers studied may include Francis Bacon, Mary Shelley, Charles Darwin, H.G. Wells, Albert Einstein, Aldous Huxley, Richard Feynman, Philip K. Dick, Octavia Butler, Michael Frayn, and Tom Stoppard.
0 Surveys a wide range of folklore genres; history and theory of folklore.
0 An exploration of the origins and compositional history of biblical literature. Critical study of texts and socio-historical analysis of their background.
0 Readings of poetic and prophetic selections from the Hebrew Bible. Analysis of devices and their rhetorical effort. Comparison of biblical poetry with other poetry of the ancient near East. In English; no knowledge of Hebrew required.
0 Exploration of literary and cultural expressions of sexuality and gender. Study of a range of historical periods and literary genres, such as essay, poetry, novel, drama, film. Topics include sexual norms and dissidence, gender identity and expression, the relationship between aesthetic forms and sexual subjectivity. Interpretation of texts particularly through the lens of queer theory. Examination of how sex and gender intersect with other forms of difference, including race and class.
0 Introduction to theory and practice of writing fiction and poetry. Emphasis on critical reading of literary models. Exercises and workshop discussions with continual reference to modeling, drafting, and revising as necessary stages in a creative process.
0 Emphasis on critical reading of literary models. Exercises and workshop discussions with continual reference to modeling, drafting, and revising as necessary stages in a creative process.
0 Introduction to theory and practice of writing poetry. Emphasis on critical reading of literary models. Exercises and workshop discussions with continual reference to modeling, drafting, and revising as necessary stages in a creative process.
0 Introduction to theory and practice of writing fiction, drama and poetry, with an emphasis on African American literary models. Critical reading, exercises and workshop discussions with continual reference to modeling, drafting, and revising as necessary stages in a creative process.
0 Introduction to the structure of English and its historical development, with a focus on techniques of linguistic analysis. Major topics include the sound systems of English and its patterns of word formation and sentence structure, and the ways these have changed over time and vary around the world.
0 The basic structure of written English, including parts of speech, sentence patterns, standard punctuation, diction, and usage.
0 Basic elements of rhetorical theory. Classical and contemporary perspectives on the nature, functions, and scope of rhetoric. Potential texts for analysis include non-fiction prose, novels, short fiction, philosophical treatises, autobiographies, biographies, and speeches.
0 Writing essays, the revision process, and editing techniques.
0 Service learning in collaboration with students at area high schools. Explores how writing can be a tool for social change. Participants serve as mentors, create a performance event concerning a pressing social issue, and compose reflections, literacy narratives, publicity materials, and a multimodal project. Focus on developing critical self-awareness.
0 A hands-on exploration of writing at the intersection of technology and rhetoric. Students will learn to read, analyze, and compose the kind of multimodal documents (combining text, image, and sound) that constitute communication in our digital world.
0 An introduction to the changing nature of books, texts, and narrative in Information Age. Role of book in relation to other media, history of computers and writing, influence of computing on contemporary literature and culture, emerging forms of digital narrative and reading. Practical skills taught range from how to find digital literature and other texts online to using Web media to create literary works.
0 For students who want to improve their academic writing skills, focusing in particular on literary analysis, argument, style, clarity and engagement with other points of view. Readings from literary texts in various genres and from critical essays. Especially useful to prepare for upper-level courses in English.
0 An introduction to the techniques of literary analysis and a brief survey of the most common approaches to literature.
0 Surveys major works of English and continental Middle Ages. Readings may include romance, lyric and drama, Germanic epic, works of Dante, Chretien de Troyes, Jean de Meun, Christine de Pisan, Malory, English and continental mystics.
0 Representative early, middle, and later works, including comedies, tragedies, histories, and romances. Historical and cultural contexts.
0 Readings in Shakespeare and contemporaries such as Marlowe, Dekker, Middleton, Jonson, Webster, Chapman, Marston. Elizabethan and Jacobean theatrical and social contexts.
0 Detailed study of selected major medieval and Renaissance works written in England. Cultural attitudes and historical contexts. May include Beowulf, Anglo-Saxon lyric, drama, sonnets; works of women writers, Chaucer, Spenser, Sidney. Some readings in Middle English.
0 The culture of seventeenth and eighteenth-century Britain seen through detailed study of selected major texts. Drama, poetry, political writings, and early novels by men and women. Authors may include Donne, Milton, Jonson, Behn, Swift, Pope, Montagu, and Wollstonecraft.
0 Detailed study of selected major texts from the 19th and 20th centuries. Transitions from Romanticism to Victorian age to Modernism. Historical, social, literary contexts. Issues such as rise of democracy; industrial revolution; the "woman question"; revolutions in literary form. Authors might include Wordsworth, Austen, Dickens, Arnold, T.S. Eliot, and Woolf.
0 A detailed study of selected major texts of American literature from the 17th century to the 20th century. Issues such as race, gender, and regionalism. Authors such as Franklin, Hawthorne, Dickinson, Hemingway, and Morrison.
0 Consideration of key texts in African American literature that explore the experiences of people of African descent in America from the mid-nineteenth century to the contemporary moment. Relationship between literary texts, historical events and cultural formations. Examines a range of texts and genres (autobiography, slave narrative, travel narrative, poetry, essays, fiction), and their contribution to national literary tradition.
0 An exploration of the role played by literature in the development of American Jewish ethnic identity. Primary materials include essays, poetry, plays, short stories, novels, films and music.
0 Different perspectives on how the Holocaust should be represented. Examination of a wide range of texts including fiction, memoirs, critical essays, poems and films in different languages (in translation). Emphasis on the international and comparative nature of Holocaust literary studies and investigation into the propriety of literary representation of historical catastrophe. Consideration of our own role as readers serving as witnesses to an event that has marked itself indelibly in the aesthetic history of the twentieth century.
0 The Bible as a major source of contemporary Western religious symbolism and culture. Exploration of how this literary legacy appears in our own cultural experience. Historical critical and literary critical method and theory introduced and applied to the texts.
0 Study of selected writers or particular themes or genres in Native American literatures.
0 Major British, American, and other fiction writers of the nineteenth century studied in the context of the broad global, intellectual, and artistic interests of the century.
0 Major British and American poets of the twentieth century.
0 Major British, American, and other fiction writers of the twentieth century studied in the context of the broad global, intellectual, and artistic interests of the century.
0 The context, form, style and meaning of literary works by women.
0 A class in the making of fiction. Intensive discussion of students' own fiction. Readings include both fiction and essays about fiction by practicing writers. Writing short critical papers, responding to works of fiction, and the fiction of colleagues, in-class writing exercises, intensive reading, and thinking about literature, in equal parts, and attendance at readings.
0 A class in the making of poetry. Intensive discussion of students' own poems. Readings in both poetry and essays about poetry by practicing poets. Writing short critical prose pieces, responding critically to colleagues' poems, in-class and outside writing exercises, memorization, and attendance at poetry readings.
0 Study of selected writers or particular themes in Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Literatures.
0 Selected writers from countries formerly colonies of Britain, France, Denmark, etc. Attention to ways regions have developed distinctive political and aesthetic values resulting from indigenous traditions and foreign influences.
0 Political and literary traditions that intersect in the fiction, poetry, and drama written in English by Caribbean writers, primarily during the 20th century.
0 Comparisons among the literary traditions in Africa, the Caribbean, and North and South America.
0 Research and writing of senior honors project. Strongly recommended for students planning graduate work.
0 Literary patterns characteristic of medieval myth, epic, and romance; their continuing vitality in modern works; and links between Medieval works like "The Prose Edda", "Beowulf", "The Morte D'Arthur", "The Volsunga Saga", and "Grettis Saga" and modern narratives like Tolkien's "The Lord of the Rings".
0 Exploration of the social and political aspects of language use, including conversational behavior, persuasive uses of language, social dialects, and language and gender; analytical methods of pragmatics and discourse analysis.
0 Introduction to the basic units of grammatical description; motivation for and nature of constituent structure and syntactic categories; fundamental grammatical concepts employed in the teaching and learning of languages.
0 An introductory study of meaning in language and paralanguage. General semantics, kinesics, linguistic relativity and recent developments in linguistic semantics.
0 Specifically designed for students interested in further study in the physical and biological sciences. Exposes students to the conventions of scientific prose in the genres of research articles and proposals. Students learn to accommodate scientific information to general audiences.
0 Conventions of legal writing and research. Students learn how to read and write about cases, statutes or other legislation; how to apply legal principles to fact scenarios; and how to present a written analysis for readers in the legal profession. Assignments may include the law-school application essay, case briefs, legal memos, and client letters.
0 Intensive practice in the forms of written communication common in the business world-letters, memos, short reports, and proposals. Principles of rhetoric and effective style.
0 Focus on accommodating technical material and empirical studies to lay audiences, and helping writers to achieve stylistic flexibility and correctness.
0 Professional writing courses that focus on the audiences, conventions, and genres of particular disciplines, professions, or organizations. Examples include writing for the arts, writing case studies and investigative reports, writing about economics, and writing for non-profit organizations.
0 The United States from colonial times to the end of the Civil War. Establishment and development of American institutions.
0 The United States from the end of the Civil War to the present. Economic, social, intellectual, and political developments. Rise of industry and emergence of the United States as a world power.
0 An exploration of the roots of modern science from the ancient Greeks through the medieval and early modern periods. Focus on the men and women who helped to create the sciences and to change public perceptions of their disciplines.
0 An exploration of the way different societies have used, imagined, and managed nature. Includes examination of questions of land use, pollution, conservation, and the ideology of nature, especially but not exclusively in Europe and North America.
0 Introduction to the history of major technological changes and innovations; examination of the revolutionizing potential of technology.
0 Reading and research skills and methods. Research papers will be based on the topic of the seminar.
0 An examination of the economic, family, and political roles of colonial, slave, immigrant, and frontier women in America from pre-industrial colonial period through the early stages of 19th-century industrialization and urbanization.
0 An examination of women's changing roles in working class and middle class families, the effects of industrialization on women's economic activities and status, and women's involvement in political and social struggles including those for women's rights, birth control, and civil rights.
0 An analysis of the economic, family, and political roles of European women from 1750 to the present. The effects of industrialization on women's work and status, the demographic parameters of women's lives, and women's participation in political events from market riots to suffrage struggles.
0 Explores the social construction of sexualities from the first colonial settlement to the modern era in the United States. Analyzes the implications of these understandings for power relations in U.S history.
0 Examination of British, French, and American women who rebelled against laws and cultural ideas that restricted women in their era. Explores changing assessments of these women across time.
0 An exploration of the theories and rhetoric about the nature and existence of women in the West, focusing on the experience of women from the hegemony of Classical Greece to the French Revolution, an era that marks the beginning of a continuous process of change. Emphasis will be on the period between 1250 and 1750, when the Western European world was fundamentally altered in every aspect and in every level of society, culture, and government.
0 Study of encounters, exchanges, and clashes between Native Americans, Europeans, and Africans in the early modern Atlantic World. Examines conquest and colonial systems; movement of men and women and mixing of peoples, and the persistence of native folkways.
0 Introduction to the history of Asian Americans in the United States and the Americas and to the field of Asian American Studies, from an interdisciplinary perspective. Topics include theories of race and ethnicity; Asian migration and diaspora to the Americas; Asian American work and labor issues; gender, family, and communities; nationalism and nativism, and anti-Asian movements; Asian Americans in World War II, the Cold War, and the issues in the civil rights & post-civil rights era.
0 The history of immigration and the development of diverse populations i the United States are examined. Topics include related political controversies, the social experiences of immigrants, ethnicity, generations, migration, inter-group relations, race, and diversity in American culture.
0 Survey of the military history of Europe through an examination of the economic, financial, strategic, tactical, and technological aspects of the development of military institutions and warfare from the dynastic wars of the Valois and Habsburgs to the national wars of the French Revolution and Napoleonic Empire.
0 The military history of Europe through an examination of the economic, financial, strategic, tactical, and technological aspects of the development of military institutions and warfare from the Congress of Vienna in 1815 to the present.
0 The history of London, beginning with its foundation by the Romans, continuing with the city's progressive political and cultural domination of England, the British Isles and the British Empire, and concluding with a look at the city in the 20th century. Students look at London through the eyes of contemporaries and historians while forming their own impressions of the city during course-based walking tours of the city.
0 Britain's empire from the mid-sixteenth century to the late twentieth century, focusing on the encounter between Britain and indigenous peoples. Topics include the origins of British imperialism in Ireland and North America, the slave trade, the East India Company and India, women in empire, transportation and the making of Australia, sex in empire, missionaries, racial theories, and decolonization.
0 British history from Roman times to the 15th century. The Anglo-Saxon, Scandinavian, and Norman invasions; the coming of Christianity; Magna Carta, the development of Parliament, legal institutions, and the Common Law; the decline of medieval kingship.
0 British history from the War of the Roses to the Hanoverian succession; Yorkist and Tudor society and politics; the Renaissance and Reformation in England, Henry VIII through Elizabeth I; 17th-century crises and revolutions; intellectual and cultural changes; the beginnings of empire; the achievement of political and intellectual order.
0 British history from the Glorious Revolution of 1688 to the present. The revolution of 1688; the structure of 18th-century society and politics; economic and social change in the Industrial Revolution; 19th- and 20th-century political and social reform; imperialism; the impact of the First and Second World Wars on British society.
0 An overview of Russian history stressing the main lines of development of the Russian state and the evolution of Russian culture to the present day.
0 Political, cultural, and economic developments in 20th-century Europe.
0 Introductory survey of the history of Latin America from pre-Columbian Indian cultures to the beginning of the wars for independence (ca. 1810), covering cultural, political, social, and economic developments. Major themes include conquest, colonialism, indigenous culture, African slavery, religion, race and ethnicity, and gender ideologies.
0 Introductory survey of the history of Latin America from the era of independence (c. 1810-1825) through the early 1980s. Major themes include independence and sovereignty, postcolonialism and neocolonialism, nation- and state-building, liberalism, citizenship, economic development and modernization, social organization and stratification, race and ethnicity, gender relations, identity politics, reform and revolution, authoritarianism and democratization, and inter-American relations.
0 Survey of the principal developments in the history and culture of the peoples of African descent in colonial North America and the United States to 1865. Examines the African past, the Atlantic slave trade, variation in slavery, the growth of free black communities, the transformations of families and cultural forms, and patterns of resistance.
0 An introductory course in the African-American experience in the United States from 1865 to the present. Topics include the aftermath of the Civil War on US race relations, the rise of segregation, northern migration, World War I and II, Civil Rights Movements, and the Black Power Movement.
0 A study of the United States as an emerging world power and the American response to changing status in world affairs. Emphasis on the relationship between internal and external development of the nation.
0 An exploration of the relationship between law and the social and political order between 1750 and 1950. Discussion of important historical issues--religious liberty, economic development, slavery and the Civil War, the political economy of industrialization, the creation of the modern state--from a legal and constitutional perspective.
0 History and culture of Ancient Mesopotamia, as reconstructed from archaeology, language, and texts of the region. Emphasis on culture, literature, religion, and institutions.
0 Introduction to the Rabbinic movement and its history, first to seventh century CE. Survey of the essential texts of ancient Rabbinic literature, both halakhic (legal) and aggadic (non-legal).
0 Political, economic, social, and cultural development within Jewish history from the Biblical period to the late Middle Ages. Special attention to the emergence of Rabbinic Judaism and its subsequent encounter with medieval Christian and Islamic civilizations.
0 Political, economic, social, and cultural development within Jewish history from the end of Middle Ages to the present. Special attention to twentieth-century developments including the Nazi holocaust and its aftermath, the Zionist movement and the creation of the State of Israel; rise of the contemporary American Jewish community.
0 An interdisciplinary survey of the development of East Asian cultures. An historical approach drawing on all facets of East Asian traditional life, to gain an appreciation of the different and complex cultures of the area.
0 A survey of the historical development of modern Asia since 1700. Primarily concerned with the efforts of East Asians to preserve their traditional cultures in the face of Western expansion in the 18th and 19th centuries, and their attempts to survive as nations in the 20th century.
0 Jewish urban experience from ancient times to the present. Public space and private space. The city and the sacred. Jewish ghettos and quarters. The struggle over modern Jerusalem.
0 Closely guided research in primary sources for students currently enrolled in selected 100- or 200-level surveys in the Department of History.
0 Follows the ideas and ideals of Western and non-Western colonialism and the echoes of colonialism's history through twentieth-century cinema. Investigates colonial events and processes, including the West's cultural and political imperialism. Draws on leading historians of the colonial world and theorists of the visual to examine what imperialism was and is, both on the ground and in the popular mind of the West.
0 The history of the United States and of its cinema in the 1970s.
0 A history of religion, religious movements, and churches in America from the early Colonial period to the present, with special attention to the relation between church and society.
0 Roots of Nazi Jewish policy in the l930's and during World War II: the process of destruction and the implementation of the "final solution of the Jewish problem" in Europe, and the responses made by the Jews to their concentration and annihilation.
0 Explores the roots of Apartheid and the anti-Apartheid movement from precolonial times to the present: the social history of work and identity, the rise of kingdoms (Zulu, Sotho), conquest and colonial administration, urban and rural mass politics, gender relations, and the transition to democracy.
0 An exploration of the history of West Africa from the nineteenth century until independence in 1960. Emphasis on transition from pre-colonial African states and societies to colonialism and the birth of modern nation-states in the era of independence.
0 Social and religious history of early Christianity from its origins in the first century to the reign of Constantine.
0 Study of the political, social, and religious development of the Jewish nation from its inception to its return from exile in Babylonia around 536 C.E. Focus on biblical texts, archaeological finds, and source materials from neighboring cultures to reconstruct political history and the development of religious concepts.
0 The ancient Greeks from Homer to Socrates, 800-400 B.C. Society and religion of the city-state, the art and literature of Periclean Athens, the Peloponnesian War, and the intellectual circle of Socrates.
0 History of the Greeks 400-30 B.C.: Alexander and the changes he wrought in the Mediterranean world; the rise of monarchies and leagues; new directions in religion, art, literature, and science; and Hellenization of the Near East, including the Jews.
0 Ancient Rome 753-44 B.C., from its founding to the assassination of Julius Caesar. Rome's conquest of the Mediterranean world, the social and political forces that brought it about, and the consequent transformation and decline of the Republic.
0 The Imperial court and government; the diversity of culture in provinces and cities and the progress of Romanization; Roman religion and its transformation in late antiquity; the Roman army and defense of the frontiers.
0 From one empire to another: Rome to Charlemagne. This period is approached as a crucible in which classical, Christian, and Germanic elements merged, yielding new experimental syntheses. This course will deal with issues of authority, cultural trends, and the formation of group solidarity.
0 Medieval civilization in the 11th through 15th centuries. Emphasis on cultural and political developments of the high Middle Ages with study of the principal sources of medieval thought and learning, art and architecture, and political theory prior to the Renaissance.
0 Intellectual developments in Italy and Northern Europe from 1300 to 1550 and their influence on the arts and religion; social and economic trends, including the rise of the commercial economy in cities; the family and the role of women in society; expansion of Europe overseas and the beginnings of colonization; emergence of the state and consequent changes in political theory.
0 Examination of developments in European religion between 1450 and 1700; the late-medieval Church and its critics; rise of Protestant thought in Germany and its spread throughout Europe; reform efforts in the Catholic Church; religious wars and violence and their impact on state and society; consequences of religious reform in society and its impact on the family and women.
0 The political, economic, social, and cultural development of Europe from the Congress of Vienna to the First World War.
0 National states, ethnic conflict and communist parties across the 20th century, including the collapse of the Soviet bloc regimes and the break-up of Yugoslavia.
0 The origins and history of fascism in Europe, 1918-1945. Emphasis divided between the industrialized (or industrializing) nations and the largely agrarian countries of Europe. The rise of fascism in other parts of the world.
0 An exploration of the roots, dynamics, and consequences of the Russian Revolution of 1917. Major interpretations of the fall of tsarism, social and political forces at play, Leninism and Stalinism.
0 Emphasis on the historical development of law enforcement agencies, criminal jurisdictions, and trial procedure, 1500-1800. Nature of principal felonies and major trends in crime; penal theory and practice in historical perspective.
0 The founding of the English colonies in America and their European backgrounds, the reasons for the instability of colonial society to 1689 and the emergence of stable societies after 1689; the development of colonial regionalism, political institutions, social divisions, the economy, religion, education, urban and frontier problems in the eighteenth century.
0 The background and course of the American Revolution and early nationhood through the War of 1812. Emphasis on how the Revolution shaped American political and social development, the creation of a new government under the Constitution, and the challenges facing the new nation.
0 Traces how the strong nationalism after the War of 1812 transformed int the sectionalism that led to Civil War. The course concentrates on the controversies over slavery and other issues contributing to North-South antagonism, including Jacksonian democracy, capitalism, racism, immigration, manifest destiny and religious, social, and intellectual movements, each of which produced its own social tendencies and tensions.
0 Civil War, sectional and class conflicts and their impact on American life and institutions from the beginning of the Civil War through the Gilded Age; social, economic, and political reconstruction of the Union; industrialization, urbanization, and technological changes.
0 The emergence of modern institutions and identities, 1900-1945. These institutions may include corporate enterprises and the welfare state; identities include homosexuality, the New Woman, and the New Negro.
0 American history from the inauguration of Harry S. Truman to the present with emphasis upon politics and foreign relations, but with consideration of special topics such as radicalism, conservatism, and labor.
0 Twentieth-century U.S. civil rights movement from the vantage point of women, considering both women's involvement in the legal campaigns and political protests and the impact of civil rights struggles on women's condition, status, and identity.
0 An exploration of the forces that have transformed metropolitan and rural life since the mid-19th century. What role have politics, policy, economics, and ideology/culture played in creating an urbanized and then a "suburbanized" nation?
0 Political, social, and religious history of the Jews from the Persian period to the Judean revolt of 66-70 CE. Special attention to the rise of sectarian and revolutionary movements.
0 Political, social, and religious history of the Jews from the destruction of the Jerusalem Temple in 70 CE to the Muslim conquests. Special attention to the political transformation of Judaism under late Roman Christianity, and the rise of the Rabbinic movement.
0 Emergence of new powerful population centers, religious and cultural creativity, new forms of community, and radical messianic movements.
0 Social, political, economic, and cultural change in the Jewish world since 1650. Emphasis on emancipation, assimilation, and new forms of Jewish identity in Western and Eastern European Jewry from the 17th to the 20th centuries.
0 History of modern Israel since the beginning of the Zionist settlement in 1882. Attention to different interpretations and narratives of Israel's history, including the historical and ideological roots of Zionism, the establishment of the State of Israel, ideological forces, wars, and the triumphs and crises of democracy.
0 American political, economic, and cultural relations with China and Japan from the American colonial era to the present. Diplomacy and power politics; Christian missions; immigration and exclusion; overseas education; art and literature; trade, investment, technology.
0 A survey of theoretical perspectives on the arts from Plato to the present, along with critical examination of specific works of art. Analysis of concepts central to thought about art, such as beauty, form, content, expression, representation, interpretation, creation, style, medium, realism, aesthetic experience, and aesthetic value.
0 Reading and philosophical criticism of fiction, poetry, and drama, dealing with issues of moral, religious, and metaphysical significance.
0 A conceptional introduction to Judaism, analyzing its fundamental concepts from both analytical and historical perspectives. Discussion of "normative" Judaism as well as other conceptions of Judaism. Topics include: God, the Jewish people, authority, ethics, the sacred and the profane, particularism and universalism.
0 A broad survey of the concepts of authority, faith, and reason in Jewish tradition from the Bible to the modern period, and their interrelationships.
0 A philosophical study of some of the main problems of religious thought: the nature of religious experience, the justification of religious belief, the conflicting claims of religion and science, and the relation between religion and morality.
0 A critical examination of such classical political theories as those of Plato, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Mill, Marx, and such contemporary theories as those of Hayek, Rawls, and recent Marxist thinkers.
0 Main issues in the philosophy of science. Special attention to the ways scientific developments have influenced the philosophy of science and how philosophy of science has influenced scientific progress. Case studies of selected historical episodes in which science and philosophy have interacted significantly, focusing on the physical, biological, or social sciences.
0 Issues in the discovery and justification of biological theories and models. Focus on cases from twentieth century biology, such as the genetic revolution or evolutionary theory.
0 An evaluation of different kinds of arguments for the claim that the natural environment should be preserved. Perspectives cut across the disciplines of philosophy (environmental ethics and philosophies of nature); economics (cost-benefit analysis); and biology (evolution, ecology, environmental studies).
0 Special topics course taken as part of an approved study abroad program.
0 The role of representation and reasoning in cognition considered from the differing perspectives of the cognitive-science disciplines: linguistics, philosophy, neuroscience, psychology and computer science.
0 A study of the main positions and arguments in the free will debate in contemporary analytic philosophy.
0 Problems, issues, and points of view of current interest in philosophy.
0 A study of the origins and development of philosophy and science in ancient Greece, focusing on the pre-Socratics, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.
0 A study of major philosophical issues of the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries through an examination of such philosophers as Descartes, Newton, Hume, and Kant.
0 A study of authors such as Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Sarte, and Camus on issues of human morality, freedom, and suffering.
0 Problems, issues, and points of view in the history of philosophy.
0 Philosophical theories, historical and contemporary, of beauty, sublimity, and other aesthetic qualities, of aesthetic experience, and of aesthetic judgment.
0 A critical examination of classical and contemporary systems of ethics, such as those of Aristotle, Kant, Mill, and Rawls.
0 A critical examination of the moral dimensions of decision-making in health related contexts. Readings are drawn from philosophical, medical, and other sources.
0 Examination of fundamental concepts related to law, e.g. legal systems, law and morality, justice, legal reasoning, responsibility.
0 An introduction to current issues at the interface of physics and philosophy, associated with our current picture of the physical world as fundamentally quantum mechanical. Topics include the debate between Einstein and Bohr on the objectivity and completeness of the quantum description, nonlocality and Bell's theorem, realism and the measurement problem, irreversibility and the arrow of time.
0 An inquiry into the nature and function of language and other forms of symbolism.
0 Some central topics in the theory of knowledge, such as perception, memory, knowledge, and belief, skepticism, other minds, truth, and the problems of induction.
0 The study of some central metaphysical concepts and issues including the nature and validity of metaphysical thinking, universals, identity, substance, time, God, and reality.
0 An introduction to core issues in the philosophy of mind, focusing especially on the basic metaphysical question of dualism versus physicalism.
0 A comparative, historical, interdisciplinary study of human socieities that focuses on the main components of human societies, how they are organized, how they change, and how they come to shape our collective social existence.
0 Elementary descriptive and inferential statistics. Construction and percentaging of bivariate contingency tables; frequency distributions and graphic presentations; measures of central tendency and dispersion; parametric and nonparametric measures of association and correlation; regression; probability; hypothesis testing; the normal, binomial and chi-square distributions; point and interval estimates.
0 The underlying logic, major strategies, specific techniques and skills of sociological research. Research design, measurement, data collection, sampling, field research experiments, surveys, index and scale construction, data analysis, interpretation and report writing.
0 Development of the science of sociology; historical backgrounds; recent theories of society. Required of all sociology majors.
0 An introduction to the sociological study of deviant behavior, covering such topics as mental illness, sexual deviance, and the use of drugs.
0 Theoretical perspectives and their applications. Socialization through the life course, the self-concept, attitudes, emotion, attribution, interpersonal relations, group processes, deviance, and social change.
0 The dynamics of inequality: its social production, politics, future, and ideological bases. Utopian communities, efforts to eliminate inequality.
0 Resource depletion and the deterioration of the environment. Relationship to lifestyles, individual consumer choices, cultural values, and institutional failures. Projection of the future course of American society on the basis of the analysis of scarcity, theories of social change, current trends, social movements, government actions, and the futurist literature.
0 Institutional bases of gender roles and gender inequality, cultural perspectives on gender, gender socialization, feminism, and gender-role change. Emphasis on contemporary American society.
0 A basic introduction to quantitative methods used in psychological research.
0 Biological basis of behavioral development in relation to genetic, constitutional, anatomical, physiological, and environmental factors. Emphasis upon both phylogenetic and ontogenetic research findings in biological psychology.
0 The influence of social factors on the individual and on interpersonal behavior. Includes topics such as conformity, attitude change, person perception, interpersonal attraction, and group behavior.
0 A general introduction and overview to the fundamental theoretical, conceptual, and practical issues in psychological research in both the laboratory and the field.
0 An introduction to the anatomical structures and physiological processes that determine behavior. After a study of the basic functioning of the nervous system, the course will examine the acquisition and processing of sensory information, the neural control of movement, and the biological bases of complex behaviors such as sleep, learning, memory, sex, language, and addiction.
0 Overview of the fundamental types of learning that occur without formal instruction. The course covers fundamentals of classical and instrumental conditioning as studied in a variety of species in addition to more modern theories of learning. We will then explore how these principles influence diverse processes such as memory, attention, extinction, categorization, motivation, and in some cases, how they are implemented in the brain and disrupted in disease.
0 An investigation of various career and graduate school opportunities available to psychology majors. Students will learn about a wide range of career fields, will learn how to utilize available resources to pursue career goals, and will take steps to advance their professional identity and development.
0 A survey of phenomena and theories of perception including psychological, anatomical, physiological, and environmental factors important in determining how we perceive the world. Historical background will be examined as well as contemporary research.
0 Survey and critical examination of a problem in the community and related interventions. Analysis of theory and research relevant to the problem. Historical and current trends discussed. A student who has completed PSYC309 must have permission of the department in order to register for PSYC318.
0 Apply knowledge gained in to provide interventions to individuals dealing with a community problem. Critical analysis of interventions and related research. Ethical and cultural considerations in the provision of services are addressed.
0 Etiology, diagnosis, prevention and treatment of emotional disorders of childhood and adolescence.
0 A survey of historical and contemporary psychological views on a wide variety of sexual behaviors; theory and research bearing on the relationship between life span psychological development, psychological functioning, interpersonal processes and sexual behaviors; political and social issues involved in current sexual norms and practices.
0 Research, theory and their practical applications pertaining to the development, maintenance and dissolution of human relationships. Processes critical to successful relating (e.g., communication, bargaining, conflict resolution), and issues associated with troubled dyadic relations with equal partners (e.g., jealousy, spouse abuse, divorce).
0 A survey of the biology, life span development, socialization, personality, mental health, and special issues of women.
0 Survey and critical examination of the effects of social process and social structure in community life on individual mental health. Includes theoretical models in community psychology.
0 An introduction to the basic models, methods of research, and findings in memory, problem-solving, and language and their applications.
0 The nature, diagnosis, etiology, and treatment of mental disorders.
0 Cultural components in theory and research in personality, social, and community psychology. Interplay of individual, ethnic, and cultural factors in psychosocial growth and well-being, cross-cultural and cross-ethnic communication, and counseling and psychotherapeutic interactions.
0 Survey of research and theory of psychological development from conception through childhood, stressing physiological, conceptual and behavioral changes, and the social and biological context in which individuals develop.
0 A description of adolescent development based on research and theory interrelating psychological, intellectual, and social changes during the teen years and the systems dealing with those changes.
0 Theory, research, and implications of developmental stability and change in physiological, intellectual, and interpersonal functioning in the social context from early adulthood through the aging years.
0 A general survey of the field of industrial organizational psychology including such topics as organizational entry (recruitment, selection, training, socialization); organizational psychology (motivation, leadership, job attitudes); and productivity in the work place (performance appraisal, absenteeism, turnover). The role that the larger environment plays in influencing work behaviors and work attitudes.
0 Overview of the field of negotiation and the social-psychological and contextual factors that facilitate and inhibit successful negotiation agreements. Students will engage in a variety of negotiation exercises individually and as a team.
0 A study of the major factors underlying international relations, the causes of conflict and cooperation among international actors, the role of international institutions, the interactions of domestic and foreign policies, and major issues in security, economy and the environment.
0 An examination of issues in international ethics, conflict generated at the international level, and problems in immigration policy and law, including theories of rights and immigration, and ideological sources of international violence.
0 Introduction to the basic fundamentals of trial advocacy including opening statement, closing argument, direct and cross examination, and all other facets of trial advocacy through a series of lectures and practice trials. Students may have an opportunity to compete in intercollegiate mock trial competition based on their skill level and demonstrated understanding of trial advocacy principles.
0 Development, concepts, and techniques of the behavioral approach to political science and other recent developments in the field.
0 An introduction to the theories of rational choice including theories of negotiation and bargaining, elections and voting in democracies, community organizing and the contrast between the roles and performances of government and market.
0 An introduction to research design and statistics applicable to political science.
0 Repeatable to 8 credits if content differs. Formerly: GVPT227. An introduction to research design and statistics applicable to political science.
0 A survey and analysis of the leading ideologies of the modern world, including anarchism, communism, socialism, fascism, nationalism, and democracy.
0 Examines some of the salient continuities and breaks between the ancient and modern traditions in Western political philosophy.
0 The study of topics in political science as taken as part of an approved study abroad program.
0 A study of the functioning and problems of state and local government in the United States, with illustrations from Maryland jurisdictions.
0 Complex nature of public policy making at the national level in the United States. Policy making will be described and analyzed in terms of major actors, relationships, and characteristics.
0 Political dimension of historical and contemporary racial cleavage in the United States with particular emphasis on the post-World War II period.
0 An overview of modern environmental philosophy, politics, and policy, exploring environmental politics in the US by way of comparison with other developed and developing countries.
0 An introduction to the comparative study of politics and governance, including the analytical frameworks for studies of politics and governmental institutions and a survey of the major types of European regimes.
0 A study of the domestic governmental institutions; processes and problems such as conflict and economic development; and the socio-economic environments that are common to developing countries of Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and Latin America.
0 Focus on three processes of international environmental policy development- identifying problems, negotiating solutions, and implementing agreements- through a range of case studies, including global climate change.
0 Development of trial advocacy skills through participation in practice trials and intercollegiate mock trial competitions. Student may have an opportunity to represent the university in intercollegiate mock trial tournaments, including the National Mock Trial Championships.
0 Analysis of the theory of games, social choice, voting and such notions of social welfare as distributive justice and liberty.
0 A study of the basis of law and its relationship with various contemporary institutions such as the courts, the legal profession, and society at large.
0 A systemic view of relations between the industrialized and third world nations examining specific themes such as the legacy of colonialism, the origins and goals of national liberation movements, efforts to promote regional cooperation, and global movements such as nonalignment and the quest for a new international economic order.
0 Provides an introductory foundation in the theory and practice of international development and conflict management. Introduces the structures, key players, intersections, and main trends in the evolution of the fields. Explores causal factors that drive economic growth, poverty, inequality, and conflict, as well as the resources, methods, and tools available to track and address these issues.
0 Serves as one of the two capstone courses for the Minor in International Development and Conflict Management. Focuses on advanced theory and the practice and profession of international conflict management and is designed to provide students an introduction to, and a chance to engage with, a core set of practical skills relevant to the field.
0 Serves as one of the two capstone courses for the Minor in International Development and Conflict Management. Focuses on advanced theory and the practice and profession of international development and is designed to provide students an introduction to, and a chance to engage with, a core set of practical skills relevant to the field.
0 A study of the complexities of international negotiation and cross-cultural decision-making. Students will apply advanced computer technology in an interactive simulation involving actual negotiations.
0 Students in this course participate as interns in an agency of government or in some other appropriate political organization. Assignments are arranged to provide students with insights into both theoretical and practical aspects of politics. Under the tutelage of the host agency and an academic advisor, students conduct a major research project of mutual interest to the student and his or her host agency in the field of government and politics.
0 The application of major concepts of political science to the realities of the political process. Readings and discussion attempt to relate the experiences of the academic interns to appropriate literature on the subject of political decision-making.
0 Experiential credit for working in Government & Politics related internships, research, and teaching opportunities.
0 Introduction to game theory with applications to political science, economics and sociology. Topics include preference theory, expected utility theory, Nash equilibria, subgame perfection, repeated games, folk theorems, and evolutionary stability.
0 Knowledge of basic solution concepts such as Nash and subgame perfectio is assumed. Topics include Bayesian equilibria, correlated equilibria, bargaining games, and common knowledge. Applications span all social sciences.
0 A required course for all honors students designed to emphasize library research, methodology, and writing skills in political science and political philosophy. A written proposal, bibliography and research design for an honors paper required of all students as a final project.
1 This course is intended to prepare students for subsequent courses requiring computation with MATLAB. Covers basics of MATLAB including simple commands, variables, solving equations, graphing differentiation and integration, matrices and vectors, functions, M-files and fundamentals of programming in the MATLAB environment.
1 Reviews and extends topics of arithmetic and number theory related to the elementary school curriculum, particularly number systems and operations with natural numbers, integers, and rationals.
1 Properties of geometric objects in two and three dimensions; parallel lines, curves and polygons; ratio, proportion, similarity; transformational geometry and measurement, constructions, justifications and proofs.
1 Permutations and combinations; probability; collecting and representing data; using statistics to analyze and interpret data.
1 Basic ideas of differential and integral calculus, with emphasis on elementary techniques of differentiation and applications.
1 Differential and integral calculus, with emphasis on elementary techniques of integration and applications.
1 Basic concepts of linear algebra: vector spaces, applications to line and plane geometry, linear equations and matrices, similar matrices, linear transformations, eigenvalues, determinants and quadratic forms.
1 Introduction to multivariable calculus, including vectors and vector-valued functions, partial derivatives and applications of partial derivatives (such as tangent planes and Lagrange multipliers), multiple integrals, volume, surface area, and the classical theorems of Green, Stokes and Gauss.
1 An introduction to the basic methods of solving ordinary differential equations. Equations of first and second order, linear differential equations, Laplace transforms, numerical methods and the qualitative theory of differential equations.
1 An overview of aspects in the history of mathematics from its beginning in the concrete problem solving of ancient times through the development of abstraction in the 19th and 20th centuries. The course considers both mathematical ideas and the context in which they developed in various civilizations around the world.
1 Students develop proof-writing skills including logic of proofs, induction and convergence concepts.
1 To develop the students' ability to construct a rigorous proof of a mathematical claim. Students will also be made aware of mathematical results that are of interest to those wishing to analyze a particular mathematical model. Topics will be drawn from logic, set theory, structure of the number line, elementary topology, metric spaces, functions, sequences and continuity.
1 Reasoning and proof as addressed in the middle school curriculum. Topics include proportional reasoning, logic and proof, types of numbers, field axioms, Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry.
1 Analysis of bivariate data, probability and randomness, law of large numbers, central limit theorem, probabilities for independent and dependent events, counting techniques, random variables and probability distributions, expected values, sampling distributions, and confidence intervals.
1 Algebraic concepts and techniques developed in the middle grades, with their larger mathematical context. Equations, inequalities and functions (linear, polynomial, exponential, logarithmic), with multiple representations of relationships. Common misconceptions of beginning algebra students.
1 Gives a unified and enriched treatment of multivariable calculus, linear algebra and ordinary differential equations, with supplementary material from subjects such as differential geometry, Fourier series and calculus of variations.
1 Second semester of a three-semester calculus-based general physics course. Vibrations, waves, fluids; heat, kinetic theory, and thermodynamics; electrostatics, circuits, and magnetism.
1 Lab includes experiments on mechanics, vibrations, waves, heat, electricity and magnetism.
1 Third semester of a three-semester calculus-based general physics course. Electrodynamics, Maxwell's equations and electromagnetic waves, geometrical optics, interference, diffraction, special theory of relativity, and modern physics.
1 Lab includes experiments on ac circuits, magnetism, light and modern physics.
1 Second semester of a calculus based general physics course. Universal gravitation, electric and magnetic fields and potentials, simple circuits, Maxwell's equations in integral form. Continues the application of mathematics to conceptual models, now with more abstract components.
1 Oscillations and AC circuits using complex variables, Fourier series and integrals, waves on strings, sound; electromagnetic waves from Maxwell's equations in differential form; physical optics.
1 Methods and rationale of experimental physics. Intended for physics majors and science and engineering students who desire a more rigorous approach. Experiments chosen from the areas of mechanics, gas laws, and heats. Theory and applications of error analysis.
1 Methods and rationale of experimental physics. Experiments chosen from the fields of electricity and magnetism including electrostatics, magnetostatics, magnetic induction, AC circuits.
1 Machine tools, design and construction of laboratory equipment.
1 A survey of topics of current research and public interest. Intended for the non-physics or non-science major. Topics covered will include lasers, quantum liquids, cosmology, elementary particles and geophysics.
1 Introduces or reviews areas of mathematics that are regularly used in upper level and graduate courses in physics, including important areas from complex variables, Fourier analysis, partial differential equations and eigenvalue problems. These methods will be studied in the context of relevant physics applications. A current standard symbolic manipulation program will be introduced and its appropriate use in theoretical analyses will be taught.
1 Third course in the three-semester introductory sequence. Methods and rationale of experimental physics. Experiments chosen from the areas of electromagnetic waves, optics and modern physics.
1 Machine representation of data including intergers and floating point. Modern computer architectural features and their interaction with software (registers, caches). Interaction between user programs and the OS: system class, process, and thread management. Optimizing software to improve runtime performance using both compilers and hand turning.
1 Fundamental mathematical concepts related to computer science, including finite and infinite sets, relations, functions, and propositional logic. Introduction to other techniques, modeling and solving problems in computer science. Introduction to permutations, combinations, graphs, and trees with selected applications.
1 Will cover work from some of the key figures in the history of computer science, as well as research being pursued at Maryland.
1 Introduction to assembly language. Design of digital logic circuits. Organization of central processors, including instruction sets, register transfer operations, control microprogramming, data representation, and arithmetic algorithms. Memory and input/output organization.
1 The semantics of programming languages and their run-time organization. Several different models of languages are discussed, including procedural (e.g., C, Pascal), functional (e.g., ML, LISP), rule-based (e.g., Prolog), and object-oriented (e.g., C++, Smalltalk). Run-time structures, including dynamic versus static scope rules, storage for strings, arrays, records, and object inheritance are explored.
1 A systematic study of the complexity of some elementary algorithms related to sorting, graphs and trees, and combinatorics. Algorithms are analyzed using mathematical techniques to solve recurrences and summations.
1 Overview of computer science research activities, techniques, and tools. Diverse research areas will be covered, including systems, networks, artificial intelligence, human-computer interaction, software engineering, graphics, vision, and theory.
1 Broad survey of the state of knowledge and problems of atmospheric science. Origin and structure of the atmosphere, meteorological observations, weather maps, forecasting, satellites, energetics, wind, general circulation, storms, severe weather, climate change, air pollution.
1 Laboratory exercises to supplement including weather observations, weather map analysis, use of the Internet, forecasting practice and climate modeling.
1 The Earth System operates through some fundamental cycles such as water, energy, and the carbon cycles. This course will build on starting with concept of feedbacks within the Earth System, global energy balance and the Greenhouse Effect. A brief introduction to the atmospheric and oceanic circulation will lead to the water cycle connecting the land, ocean, and atmosphere to the Earth System. Introduction to the Global carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles will be followed by the concept of long-term climate regulation and short-term climate variability. The concepts of cycles, feedbacks, forcings, and responses in the Earth System will be applied to Global Warming and Ozone Depletion.
1 Oceans are an important component of the Earth System and this course builds towards Earth System Science education. Oceanography is an intrinsically interdisciplinary subject with strong connections to astronomy (tidal forces), biology (ecosystems), geography (world climate), geology (sea floor tectonics), and physics (waves). We begin with the history of ocean exploration and origin of Earth and life and learn about properties of seawater, air-sea interactions, atmospheric and oceanic circulation, El Nino-Southern Oscillation, waves, tides, and tsunamis.
1 A quantitative introduction to thermodynamic analysis of bioengineering systems. Bioengineering encompasses a wide range of applications from nanoscale interactions (e.g. reactions between molecules), to cellular interactions (e.g. membrane electrical currents), to overall balances on organisms, all the way to large scale manufacturing. Each of these applications (and many others not mentioned) involve energy interactions which is the domain of thermodynamics. The basic laws of thermodynamics will be introduced and explained through a series of examples related to bioengineering systems.
1 Application of computer technology to biological and natural resource systems considering engineering aspects. Designed to help students in the use of computer technology for problem solving. The course will cover 4-5 software packages important for later use by the student.
1 Principles of fluid mechanics. Mass, momentum and energy conservation. Hydrostatics. Control volume analysis. Internal and external flow. Boundary layers. Modern measurement techniques. Computer analysis. Laboratory experiments.
1 Fluid flow, heat transfer, and mass transfer with applications in medicine, environment, biotechnology, food, agriculture, and other biosystems. Design of solutions to current problems in biological engineering is emphasized.
1 Topics covered will include cell and general physiology, membrane physiology, blood cells and clotting, circulation, metabolism, respiration, and the nervous system. A lab component will also be included.
1 This class will cover mathematics essentials that are required for bioengineering, specifically: statistics, linear algebra, differential equations, and feedback systems in biology. The course will emphasize fundamentals and numerical implementation (e.g. using Matlab). Example will be taken from bioengineering applications.
1 Descriptive statistics, introduction to probability, sampling, confidence interval estimation, hypothesis testing, simple regression and correlation. Emphasis on simple applications of statistical techniques and interpretation of statistical results.
1 Anatomy and physiology of the skeletal, muscular, neural, endocrine, and sensory systems. 1 Anatomy and physiology of the cardiovascular, respiratory, immune, digestive, urinary and reproductive systems. 
1 Basic ecological principles as they relate to the ecological dilemmas of overpopulation, pollution, increasing consumption of natural resources, and deteriorating land use ethics facing mankind today.
1 The living resources of the Chesapeake Bay from an ecosystem perspective. Designed for non-science majors, it will acquaint students with the Bay's watershed, its physical environment, and its living organisms, with an emphasis on the connections between these factors. Understanding the relationships between physical, chemical and biological processes will equip students to comprehend and appreciate the remarkable productivity of our estuary, as well as provide them with the knowledge needed to protect the Bay.
1 The diversity, structure and function of organisms as understood from the perspective of their common physicochemical principles and unique evolutionary histories.
1 An overview of basic ecological and evolutionary principles and how they relate to current global dilemmas such as overpopulation, pollution, preservation of biodiversity, and the ethics involved in these dilemmas.
1 Principles and mechanisms of heredity and gene expression. Considers plant, animal, and microbial organisms.
1 Fundamental concepts in morphology, physiology, genetics, immunology, ecology, and pathogenic microbiology. Applications of microbiology to medicine, the food industry and biotechnology.
1 Introduction to microorganisms designed for science majors. Genetic principles underlying microbial abilities; microbial structure-function relationships; metabolism, physiology, and ecology of microorganisms; interactions between microorganisms (including pathogens) and their hosts.
1 An approach to cell biology by focusing on mechanisms and unifying physical paradigms. It will not assume a great deal of factual biological knowledge, but will expect a background that prepares students to think mechanistically and quantitatively.
1 Biochemical and physiological mechanisms underlying cellular function. Properties of cells which make life possible and mechanisms by which cells provide energy, reproduce, and regulate and integrate with each other and their environment.
1 Introduction to the biology of mammals, including evolution, physiological, and behavioral specializations.
1 Lab and field techniques for the study of mammals, focusing on their identification, anatomy, histology, spatial distribution, ecology, and behavior.
1 An overview of the biology, evolution and diversity of insects and their relatives. Insect morphology, physiology, behavior and ecology; the impact of insects on humanity and the management of pest insect populations; assembly of an insect collection is required.
1 The biology of the reproductive system with emphasis on mammals and, in particular, on human reproduction. Hormone actions, sperm production, ovulation, sexual differentiation, sexual behavior, contraception, pregnancy, lactation, maternal behavior, and menopause.
1 Presentation and discussion of special subjects in the field of cell biology and molecular genetics.
1 Principles of nervous system function, ranging from molecular and cellular basis of neuron function through nervous system integration.
1 Study of animal behavior with emphasis on its evolution and function. Topics include genetic basis of behavior, communication, aggression, foraging, cooperation, mate selection, and relevance for conservation.
1 Basic principles of population, community, and ecosystem ecology. Use of these principles to predict possible consequences of human-caused changes in the environment and to understand the level of uncertainty of those predictions.
1 An examination of the biology of higher plants in dune and marsh ecosystems.
1 Ecology, evolutionary biology, and paleontology will be applied to the study of conservation, species invasions, and extinction.
1 Understanding evolutionary processes in a natural and human environment, including adaptation; DNA sequence, protein, and genome evolution; evolution of developmental mechanisms; mechanisms of evolutionary change (mutation, natural selection, drift); epidemiology; coevolution and biological control; speciation; comparative methods; extinction and conservation; human evolution.
1 Consideration of the major groups of organisms associated with the Chesapeake Bay and current issues that determine humans' present and future uses for the Chesapeake and its biota.
1 Fundamentals of biological processes in the world's oceans; emphasizes ecology of marine organisms and how ocean chemistry and ocean circulation influence biological processes such as production, dispersal, and food chain dynamics.
1 Computational methods for the study of biological sequence data in comparative biology and evolution. Analysis of genome content and organization. Database searching, pairwise and multiple sequence alignment, phylogenetic methods, pattern recognition, and functional inference. Functional and comparative genomics approaches.
1 Investigations of assigned entomological problems.
1 A survey of extinct animals that have few, if any, direct living descendants. The principles governing the functional design of animals will be used to infer life styles for extinct, and frequently bizarre, organisms.
1 An overview of the techniques used in paleobiological reconstructions of extinct animals.
1 Comparative functional anatomy of vertebrates in the context of adaptation to their environments. The vertebrate body and its systems will be considered in terms of structure, physiology, evolution, and embryonic development.
1 Algorithm development and application of software to the analysis of chemical engineering problems. File management and editing, graphics and numerical methods. Use of spreadsheets, statistics/math software and process simulators for the design of chemical process equipment.
1 Principles of thermodynamics and their application to engineering problems. First and second laws of thermodynamics, properties of gases, liquids and solids, phase equilibrium, flow and non-flow systems, energy conversion, production of work from heat, thermodynamic analysis of processes, equilibrium stage operations and the thermodynamics of chemically reacting systems.
1 Contemporary trends in chemical engineering thermodynamics that bridge the gap between fundamentals and applications. Thermodynamic analysis of non-ideal and structured systems; such as complex fluids, strongly fluctuating and nanoscale systems, dissipative systems, biosystems, and systems under extreme conditions.
1 The chemistry of carbon: aliphatic compounds, aromatic compounds, stereochemistry, arenes, halides, alcohols, esters and spectroscopy.
1 Provides experience in developing some basic laboratory techniques, recrystallization, distillation, extraction, chromatography.
1 The chemistry of carbons: aliphatic compounds, aromatic compounds, stereochemistry, arenes, halides, alcohols, esters, and spectroscopy.
1 A continuation of with emphasis on molecular structure; substitution reactions; carbonium ions; aromaticity; synthetic processes; macromolecules.
1 Synthetic organic chemistry through functional group manipulation, introduction to instrumentation essential to analysis and structure elucidation.
1 A continuation of with emphasis on molecular structure, substitution reactions; carbonium ions; aromaticity; synthetic processes; macromolecules.
1 An introduction to the physical aspects of chemistry; chemical kinetics, thermodynamics and electrochemistry in the context of current chemistry research.
1 An introduction to analytical chemistry with an emphasis on bio-analytical instrumentation and techniques.
1 An introduction to the physical aspects of chemistry for Biochemistry and Chemistry majors. Chemical kinetics, thermodynamics and electrochemistry in the context of current chemistry research.
1 Quantitative analysis, inorganic analytical chemistry, and an introduction to bio-analytical instrumentation and techniques.
1 Overview of the engineering profession as it pertains to the role of the engineer in society, professional practice and ethical standards, career development, opportunities and need for lifelong learning, importance of safety and standards, effective written, visual, and oral communications, and the impact of the engineering profession on global issues.
1 Introduction to computational tools for the solution of engineering problems. C++ & MATLAB programming including branching and loops, functions, file handling, arrays, and data structures. Students will be introduced to object-oriented programming, basic computing, algorithms, and principles of software engineering.
1 Introduction to airplanes and space vehicles as aerospace systems. Fundamentals that describe these systems. Elements of aerodynamics, airfoils and wings. Airplane performance, stability and control. Aircraft and rocket propulsion. Fundamentals of orbital motion. Aspects of vehicle conceptual design.
1 Kinematics and dynamics of three dimensional motion of point masses and rigid bodies with introduction to more general systems. Primary emphasis on Newtonian methods. Practice in numerical solutions and computer animation of equations of motion using MATLAB.
1 Fundamentals of aerodynamics. Elements of compressible flow. Normal and oblique shock waves. Flows through nozzles, diffusers and wind tunnels. Elements of the method of characteristics and finite difference solutions for compressible flows. Aspects of hypersonic flow.
1 Analysis of torsion, beam bending, plate bending, buckling and their application to aerospace.
1 Basic instrumentation electronics including DC electronics, AC electronics, semiconductors, electro-optics and digital electronics. Sensing devices used to carry out experiments in Aerospace Engineering includes metrology, machine tool measurements, bridge circuits, optical devices, and introduction to computer based data acquisition. Topics chosen to support measurements in aerodynamics, flight structures and flight control.
1 Avionics using advanced sensor and computing technologies are at the heart of every modern Aerospace vehicle. Advanced software systems to improve cockpit safety and enable unmanned and deep-space missions. Object-oriented programming and software engineering concepts required to design and build complex flight software systems. Software validation, verification and real-time performance analysis to assess flight software system reliability and robustness. Human-machine interface design for piloted systems. Automatic onboard data acquisition and decision-making for unmanned air and space vehicles.
1 Development of knowledge and skills in managing, analyzing, interpreting, and communicating spatial information. Computer Aided Drawing (CAD) and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) are introduced in the context of civil and environmental engineering applications.
1 Exploration of algorithms for solving problems in several important areas of numerical computing: roots of equations; matrix algebra and the systems of linear equations; function approximation, numerical differentiation and integration; and ordinary differential equations. Issues of solution accuracy, robustness, and efficiency are also considered. Numerical techniques are presented in the context of engineering applications, and example problems are solved using a variety of computer-based tools (primarily MATLAB).
1 Engineers have a key role to play in planning, designing, building, and ensuring a sustainable future. In this class, a problem-based approach is used to examine fundamentally-based analyses and approaches for engineering as sustainable society, with a focus on sustainable use of energy and materials, sustainable infrastructure solutions, atmospheric sustainability and sustainable water supply, and human population growth and resource consumption and its implications for sustainability.
1 Behavior, physical, mechanical and chemical properties, design and performance of civil engineering materials, including aggregates, cement, concrete, asphalt binders and mixtures, plastics and geosynthetics, timber, metals and alloys. Modified and advanced highway materials (polymer and rubber modified mixtures, high performance concrete, composites, smart materials). Laboratory testing with hands-on experience on aggregates, Portland cement concrete, asphalt mixtures, timber and metals as per SUPERAVE, ACI design methods, and ASTM standards and specifications.
1 Statistics is the science of data. Civil Engineers must often make decisions based on incomplete, variable or uncertain information. In addition, modern methods of design and analysis need to account for variability in natural, engineered and human systems. After successful completion of this class, a student should have facility and familiarity with established basic techniques for managing data, modeling variability and uncertainty, communicating about data and decisions, and supporting or defending a decision or judgment based on uncertain or incomplete data.
1 The theoretical bases for fluid statics and dynamics, including the conservation of mass, energy and momentum. Modeling of hydraulic systems are introduced. Emphasis on pipe flow and open-channel hydraulics, with real-world applications.
1 Introduction to the physical, chemical and biological systems relating to the quality of water, land and air environments. Fundamental principles will be emphasized, current environmental pollution problems will be examined and methods of pollution abatement discussed.
1 A course designed to expose students to the techniques of engineering project management and to develop analytical skills necessary on the management side of engineering projects. Topics include economic analysis, project screening and selection, organizational and project structure, scheduling, budgeting, resource management, life cycle costing, and project control.
1 Introductory study of soils in civil engineering. Soil origin, phase relationships and classification schemes. Soil hydraulics: capillary, effective stress, permeability and seepage considerations. Basic stress distribution theories and soil consolidation-settlement analysis. Integration of shear strength evaluation with slope stability analysis. If time permits, topics such as applications in geoenvironmental engineering will be covered.
1 The basic tools of structural analysis and design. Design loads. Equilibrium of external and internal forces. Shear and moment diagrams in beams and frames. Truss analysis. Influence line diagrams. The slope-deflection method and method of consistent deformation. Matrix stiffness methods for beams, frames and trusses.
1 Introduction to systems approach and systems analysis in civil and environmental engineering. Introduction to systems analysis tools that facilitate engineering management decision making including optimization and computer simulation. Introduction to linear and nonlinear mathematical optimization including linear and integer programming, elementary nonlinear programming and dynamic programming.
1 Engineering problems of transportation by highways, airways, pipelines, waterways, and railways. Transportation modes and technologies, vehicle dynamics, basic facility design, traffic stream models, capacity analysis, transportation planning, evaluation and choice, and network analysis.
1 Designed for both engineering and non-engineering students wishing to explore and assess the impact of engineering technology on society and the role of society in generating that technology. Special emphasis is placed on the interplay of diverse and often conflicting personal and collective values in both the development and implementation of new technologies. These subjects touch on many areas of interest including ethics, politics, business, the law, and society.
1 Basic circuit elements: resistors, capacitors, inductors, sources, mutual inductance and transformers; their I-V relationships. Kirchoff's Laws. DC and AC steady state analysis. Phasors, node and mesh analysis, superposition, theorems of Thevenin and Norton. Transient analysis for first- and second-order circuits.
1 Design, analysis, simulation, construction and evaluation of electric circuits. Terminal Relationships. Kirchoff's laws. DC and AC steady state analysis. Node and mesh methods. Thevenin and Norton equivalent circuits. Transient behavior of first- and second-order circuits. Frequency response and transfer functions. Ideal op-amp circuits. Diode and transistor circuits.
1 Introduction to basic measurement techniques and electrical laboratory equipment (power supplies, oscilloscopes, voltmeters, etc.) Design, construction, and characterization of circuits containing passive elements, operational amplifiers, and digital integrated circuits. Transient and steady-state response.
1 Discrete-time and continuous-time signals, sampling. Linear transformers, orthogonal projections. Discrete Fourier Transform and its properties. Fourier Series. Introduction to discrete-time linear filters in both time and frequency domains.
1 Introduction to error analysis, conditioning and stability of algorithms. Numerical solution of nonlinear equations. Vector spaces and linear transformations. Matrix algebra. Gaussian elimination. LU factorization, matrix inversion. Similarity transformations and diagonalization. Iterative computation of eigenvalues. Interpolation; splines; data fitting. Numerical integration.
1 The design and analysis of combinational and synchronous sequential systems comprising digital logic gates and flip-flop memory devices; underlying tools such as switching and Boolean algebras and Karnaugh map simplification of gate networks; design and use of decoders, multiplexers, encoders, adders, registers, counters, sequence recognizers, programmable logic arrays (PLAs), read-only memories (ROMS, PROMS), and similar devices. Arbitrary radix conversion.
1 Introduction to basic measurement techniques and electrical laboratory equipment (power supplies, oscilloscopes, voltmeters, etc.). Design, construction, and characterization of digital circuits containing logic gates, sequential elements, oscillators, and digital integrated circuits. Introduction to digital design and simulation with the Verilog Hardware Description Language (HDL).
1 Conceptual operation of transistors and diodes. Large and small signal operation of BJTs and MOSFETs. Basic transistor configurations. Logic circuits and semiconductor memory. Multi-transistor circuits including differential amplifiers and current mirrors. Frequency response.
1 Students will design and test analog and digital circuits at the transistor level. FETs and BJTs will be covered. The laboratory experiments will be tightly coordinated with materials.
1 Basic physics of devices including fields in solids, crystal structure, properties of electrons and holes. Current flow in Si using drift-diffusion model. Properties of the pn junction. Properties of devices including BJTs, FETs and their physical characteristics.
1 Concept of linear systems, state space equations for continuous systems, time and frequency domain analysis of signals and linear systems. Fourier, Laplace and Z transforms. Application of theory to problems in electrical engineering.
1 Axioms of probability; conditional probability and Bayes' rules; random variables, probability distribution and densities: functions of random variables: weak law of large numbers and central limit theorem. Introduction to random processes; correlation functions, spectral densities, and linear systems. Applications to noise in electrical systems, filtering of signals from noise, estimation, and digital communications.
1 Structure and organization of digital computers. Registers, memory, control and I/O. Data and instruction formats, addressing modes, assembly language programming. Elements of system software, subroutines and their linkages.
1 Introduction to electromagnetic fields. Coulomb's law, Gauss's law, electrical potential, dielectric materials capacitance, boundary value problems, Biot-Savart law, Ampere's law, Lorentz force equation, magnetic materials, magnetic circuits, inductance, time varying fields and Maxwell's equations.
1 The electromagnetic spectrum: Review of Maxwell's equations; the wave equation potentials, Poynting's theorem, relationship between circuit theory and fields; propagation of electromagnetic waves in homogeneous media and at interfaces; transmission line theory, waveguides, radiation and antennas.
1 Have you ever wondered why airplanes crash or bridges collapse? Or even why your car is always in the shop or your computer screen goes blank? This course will let you in on the secret of why engineered products and structures fail and how designers are changing how they work to make products with higher reliability and longer life-spans. Even more, it will make you think about the many consequences that arise from failure ranging from direct replacement cost and legal liability to environmental impact and even changes in government policies and regulation
1 Develop the skills to generate readable, compact and verifiably correct MATLAB scripts and functions to obtain numerical solutions to a wide range of engineering models and to display the results with fully annotated graphics. Learn structured programming.
1 Fundamentals of CAD, using solid modeling packages (Pro/E, SolidWorks, and Autodesk Inventor). Two and three dimensional drawing. Dimensioning and specifications. Introduction of CAD based analysis tools. Students will complete a design project.
1 Principles of fluid mechanics. Mass, momentum and energy conservation. Hydrostatics. Control volume analysis. Internal and external flow. Boundary layers. Modern measurement techniques. Computer analysis. Laboratory experiments.
1 The principles of heat transfer. Conduction in solids. Convection. Radiation. Modern measurement techniques. Computer analysis.
1 Modern instrumentation. Basic circuit design, standard microelectronic circuits. Digital data acquisition and control. Signal conditioning. Instrumentation interfacing. Designing and testing of analog circuits. Laboratory experiments.
1 Modern instrumentation. Basic circuit design, standard microelectronic circuits. Digital data acquisition and control. Signal conditioning. Instrumentation interfacing. Designing and testing of analog circuits. Laboratory experiments.
1 Fundamentals of vibration, controls and optimization. Analysis and design in time, Laplace and frequency domains. Mathematical description of system response, system stability, control and optimization. Optimal design of mechanical systems.
1 Business aspects of engineering product development. Relationship of design and manufacturing. Product specification. Statistical process control. Design team development. The development process.
1 Structure of materials, chemical composition, phase transformations, corrosion and mechanical properties of metals, ceramics, polymers and related materials. Materials selection in engineering applications.
1 Integrated statistical methodology for the improvement of products and processes in terms of performance, quality and cost. Designed experimentation. Statistical process control. Software application. Laboratory activities.
1 Worried? Can't sleep? Collisions in Space will evaluate the threat of asteroid impacts with the Earth using knowledge of asteroid characteristics and orbits. The merits of possible defense plans will be discussed, as well as the budgetary and political concerns associated with implementing any such plan.
1 Have you ever wondered if humans will ever terraform Mars or Europa so we could live there without a spacesuit? Has it ever crossed your mind how lucky you are that you live on a water-rich planet with an oxygen-rich atmosphere? Have you ever suspected novelists and scriptwriters of creating ridiculous planets that violate scientific laws? Does the fate of our planet's thin biosphere keep you up at night? How common is life in the Universe? These are difficult questions, but armed with the right information, you can answer all of them. The Science and Fiction of Planetary Systems will help you develop a deeper understanding of why planets are the way they are. Along the way, you'll see examples of mistakes made in classic science fiction movies, novels and short stories and get the chance to invent your own plausible planets!
1 Study of stars-types, properties, evolution, and distribution in space; supernovae, pulsars, and black holes.
1 Introduction to current optical observational techniques, with brief coverage of infrared, ultraviolet, and x-ray techniques. Statistics, spherical trigonometry time, catalogs, geometrical and physical optics, telescopes, and optical instruments. Effects of the atmosphere. Practical work at the observatory using a CCD camera. Some nighttime observing sessions.
1 Application of selected physics concepts in an astrophysical context. Topics would include gravity (Keplerian motion, Virial theorem, Roche limit, dynamical friction); gas dynamics (hydrostatic equilibrium, stellar models, spiral density waves), thermodynamics and statistical physics (Boltzmann distribution, Wien displacement, convective instability, degenerate gas); atomic physics (quantum principles, H atom, permitted and forbidden lines); radiation processes (line radiation, opacity).
1 The structure of planets and of their atmospheres, the nature of comets, asteroids, and satellites. Comparison of various theories for the origin of the solar system. Emphasis on a description of recent data and interpretation.
1 A study of our progression of knowledge about the universe. Topics include: early cosmological models, geocentric vs. heliocentric theory, curvature of space, Hubble's Law, Big Bang Theory, microwave background radiation, evolution of stars and galaxies, dark matter, active galaxies, quasars and the future of the universe.
1 Study of the astronomical perspective on the conditions for the origin and existence of life in the universe.
1 Possible subjects for study are the solar system, extragalactic astronomy and cosmology, the inconstant universe.
1 Algorithm development and application of software to the analysis of chemical engineering problems. File management and editing, graphics and numerical methods. Use of spreadsheets, statistics/math software and process simulators for the design of chemical process equipment.
1 Fundamentals of CAD using a solid modeling package (e.g. Pro/E or AutoCAD). Two- and three-dimensional drawings. Dimensioning and specifications. Introduction of CAD-based analysis tools. Students will complete a design project.
1 Stress and deformation of solids-rods, beams, shafts, columns, tanks, and other structural, machine and vehicle members. Topics include stress transformation using Mohr's circle; shear and moment diagrams; derivation of elastic curves; and Euler's buckling formula. Design problems related to this material are given in lab.
1 Systems of heavy particles and rigid bodies at rest and in motion. Force-acceleration, work-energy and impulse-momentum relationships. Motion of one body relative to another in a plane and in space.
1 Introduction to thermodynamics. Thermodynamic properties of matter. First and second laws of thermodynamics, cycles, reactions, and mixtures.
1 Introduction to fire protection engineering and building regulation, building safety systems, and egress system design. Evacuation modeling. Human behavior in fires. Tenability Analysis.
1 Study of fire detection and alarm and gaseous and particulate fire suppression systems. Examination and evaluation of design criteria, performance specifications and research. Application of elementary fluid theory to the design and calculation procedures for gaseous and particulate fire suppression systems. An integrated fire protection systems design project.
1 Presents students with the fundamental properties of fluids and fluid movement. Both static and dynamic fluid problems will be considered with an emphasis on fire protection systems.
1 Introduction to aqueous fire suppression. Discussion of key fluid dynamics and heat transfer processes in aqueous fire suppression. System design and performance analysis based on national standards, hydraulic theory and elementary fluid dynamics and heat transfer.
1 Fundamentals of heat and mass transfer. Conduction, convection, and radiation modes of heat transfer. Diffusion concepts and evaporation phenomena. Problem solving techniques with application to fire problems.
1 Experimental evaluation of ignition, flame spread, rate of heat release and smoke production of furnishings and interior finish materials.
1 Structure of materials, chemical composition, phase transformations, corrosion and mechanical properties of metals, ceramics, polymers and related materials. Materials selection in engineering applications.
1 Five topical areas will be presented, each leading up to specific applications that have recently come to market or are currently experiencing heavy research and development. The goal of each module will be to introduce the basic materials science principles necessary to understand these new areas.
1 Characterization of the structure of materials including both single crystal and polycrystalline materials. Laboratories will include x-ray and electron diffraction and microscopy.
1 Characterization of the electromagnetic properties of materials. Laboratories will include measurements of electrical and transport properties, index of refraction, and magnetic properties.
1 Introduction to experimental methods in materials characterization; synthesis of colloidal nanoparticles; X-ray diffraction and light scattering; optical microscopy; thermal conductivity and expansion; electrical measurements; heat capacity; computational materials design.
1 Overview of Mechanical Behavior, Elastic Behavior, Dislocations, Plastic Deformation, Strengthening of Crystalline Materials, Composite Materials, High Temperature Deformation of Crystalline Materials, Permanent Deformation of Noncrystalline Materials, Tensile Fracture at Low Temperatures, Engineering Aspects of Fracture, High Temperature Fracture, Fatigue, and Experimental determination of Mechanical Properties including Hardness of Metals and Strength of Metals, Polymers, Ceramics and Composites.
1 Study and management of soils as natural bodies, media for plant growth, and ecosystem components. Morphology, composition, formation, and conservation of soils. Chemical, biological, and physical properties are discussed in relation to the production of plants, the functioning of hydrologic and nutrient cycles, the protection of environmental quality, and engineering uses of soils.
1 Lectures, discussion, and readings in social, biological, and human dimension issues facing fisheries and wildlife biologists and natural resource managers in the United States. Coverage will include history and philosophical discussions of fish and wildlife sciences; conservation and management; principles of community, habitat, and animal ecology and management; and interrelations of wildlife, fish, and forestry.
1 How humans are affected by the quality of our air, water, soil, and food supply as well as how human activities altered these survival necessities are examined. Students will learn how the evolution and prosperity of human populations have resulted in degradation of our environment and the impact of environmental degradation on the health of people.
1 Explore environmental issues and culture with university students at Moscow State University of Environmental Engineering, Moscow, Russia via weekly videoconferences. Culture and environmental issues of both countries will be examined via individual and group presentations and guided discussions.
1 Basics of Computer Aided Drawing applied to design of constructed ecosystems. Introduction to dynamic ecosystem modeling with iconographic simulation software. Course will spend weeks on CAD and weeks on modeling. Use of campus stormwater wetland as case study.
1 This is a field-oriented course that introduces students to the techniques used to describe soil morphology, and site and profile characteristics, make land use interpretations based on soil characteristics, and classify soils. This class is designed to prepare students for the Regional Collegiate Soil Judging Contest and for students to gain experience in the description and interpretation of soils in the field.
1 This is the second field-oriented course in a three course sequence that provides intermediate training for students in the techniques used to describe soil morphology, and site and profile characteristics, make land use interpretations based on soil characteristics, and classify soils. This class is designed to prepare students for the Regional Collegiate Soil Judging Contest and for students to gain experience in the description and interpretation of soils in the field.
1 This is the third field-oriented course in a three course sequence that provides intermediate training for students in the techniques used to describe soil morphology, and site and profile characteristics, make land use interpretations based on soil characteristics, and classify soils. This class is designed to prepare students for the Regional Collegiate Soil Judging Contest and for students to gain experience in the description and interpretation of soils in the field.
1 Intensive field study of soils with particular emphasis on soil morphology, soil classification, and agricultural and urban soil interpretations. Focus is on soils of the Northeast US. The lab period is devoted to field trips, and student efforts culminate in a mandatory extended field trip.
1 This is a field-oriented course that provides advanced training for students in the techniques used to describe soil morphology, and site and profile characteristics, make land use interpretations based on soil characteristics, and classify soils. This class is designed to prepare students for the National Collegiate Soil Judging Contest and for students to gain experience in the description and interpretation of soils in the field. Students will be exposed to a variety of soil landscapes and geology from outside of the northeastern U.S.
1 A detailed look at the ecology, management, and sustainability of fisheries resources. Concepts on human and ecological dimensions are emphasized.
1 Discussion of the philosophies, principles, and practices for assessing ecosystem health with emphasis on an ecosystem perspective rather than a human health perspective. Degradation associated with human activities will be emphasized. Topics will range from local to regional to global issues, including a discussion on global warming and its possible impacts on ecosystems. Concepts will be clarified using case histories from the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
1 Concepts and case histories in ecotoxicology. Emphasis on origin and variety of environmental pollutants, routes of biological exposure, modes of toxicological action and effects on individual organisms, populations and ecosystems. Ecotoxicological issues in the Chesapeake Bay will be used as examples.
1 The study of ecology has a long and interesting history, from early society's efforts to understand and alter their environment as a matter of survival to the challenges the modern world is facing that are global in scale. Through the course text, distributed supplemental chapter readings and an understanding of the scientific literature, this course will cover the essential concepts and principles of ecosystem ecology as well as its history and past and present controversies. Several of the basic methods and tools of field research and the applied management of ecosystems will be discussed and demonstrated with several field excursions in the natural environs of the DC area. Central to this course will be the understanding that modern human society is an integral part of nature, with the power to impact and influence elements of the natural world at multiple scales. An analysis of policy implications for the biosphere will be discussed.
1 Consideration of the major groups of organisms associated with the Chesapeake Bay and current issues that determine humans' present and future uses for the Chesapeake and its biota.
1 Oral presentation of the results of investigational work by reviewing recent scientific literature in the various phases of natural resource sciences, horticulture and agronomy.
1 Earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and tsunami frequently remind us of the dangers associated with living on a constantly changing planet. How do people prepare for these rare but dramatic events? Student will study the science behind earthquakes and volcanoes, how it guides monitoring, forecasting, prevention, and response, and the cultural and ethical aspects of these events.
1 Examination of evidence used to reconstruct critical events in the history of life by looking at case studies of significant evolutionary origins, transitions, and extinctions; addressing the role of paleontology in human society, including science education, conservation, and the media.
1 An examination of the geologic and geochemical processes at work in the solar system from the perspectives supplied by space age exploration of the planets and other solar system bodies.
1 Focuses on energy systems and resources on a global scale. It addresses energy transfer in natural systems, distribution of energy resources in the natural world, and problems of efficiency and limited energy resources. It is appropriate for those interested in science and technical energy issues as well as policy, education and the media.
1 Examination and investigation of Earth Science phenomena in the field, particularly geology. Involves fieldwork of one week or longer duration, which work normally includes both observation and data collection.
1 An introduction to the fundamentals of forensic science with special reference to the application of geological techniques, and to the applications of Earth science in understanding problems in homeland security and hazardous materials response.
1 Basic mineralogy for geology majors. The principles of morphologic crystallography, crystal chemistry, and determinative mineralogy.
1 A review of the theory, principles, and applications of Paleontology. A systematic overview of the morphology, evolution, and relationships of the major fossil-producing taxa.
1 Analysis of landforms, organized on the basis of the geologic processes that have operated during the late Cenozoic. Constructional and erosional landforms related to physical systems operating on geologic structures through time.
1 Study of the deformation of Earth's lithosphere, especially stress, rheology, strain, and the origin and significance of structural features. Development of 3-dimensional thinking through drafting and drawing of structures, construction of geologic maps and cross-sections, and stereographic and orthographic representation of structures. Improvement of scientific writing. Two weekend field trips.
1 Description, origin, and distribution of sediments and sedimentary rocks. Two mandatory weekend field trips.
1 The Earth System operates through some fundamental cycles such as water, energy, and the Carbon Cycle. This course will build on starting with concept of feedbacks within the Earth System, global energy balance and the Greenhouse Effect. A brief introduction to the atmospheric and oceanic circulation will lead to the water cycle connecting the land, ocean, and atmosphere to the Earth System. Introduction to the Global carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles will be followed by the concept of long-term climate regulation and short-term climate variability. The concepts of cycles, feedbacks, forcings, and responses in the Earth System will be applied to Global Warming and Ozone Depletion.
1 Practical approach to basic statistics applied in the geosciences. Experimental design, elementary statistics and probability, sequence analysis, spatial analysis, linear regression, nonparametric statistics, bivariate, multivariate and principal components analysis of variance, hypothesis testing. Problem sets and participatory discussion of statistical applications in the current literature.
1 Introduction to physical, chemical, and biological properties of the ocean. Role of the ocean in climate as a component of the Earth system. El Nino and the ocean, impact of global warming on the ocean and marine habitats including fisheries.
1 Examination and investigation of Earth Science phenomena in the field, particularly geology. Involves field work of one week or a longer duration, which would normally involve both observations and data collection, with associated classroom lectures and/or laboratory study, normally including additional analysis of collected observations and data. Particular programs may require certain prerequisites. Permission of instructor required. Special fees may be necessary.
1 The first semester of the two-semester Geology Senior Thesis. Emphasis is on developing a plan for original research in the geosciences and presenting that plan both in writing and in public presentations that adhere to geosciences professional standards.
1 The second semester of the two-semester Geology Senior Thesis. Investigation of specific original research question in geosciences. Emphasis is on completion of original research proposed in and presentation of results both in writing and in public presentations that adhere to geosciences professional standards.
1 An introduction to communication sciences and disorders; a survey of the bases of normal speech, language and hearing ability, major forms of communicative disorders and their treatment.
1 An introduction to current theories of language and an investigation of their relationship to human communication behavior. Survey of the experimental literature relating to this question.
1 Anatomy, physiology, and neurology of speech mechanism.
1 Gross anatomy of the ear and pathways for transmission of sound energy through the peripheral and central auditory system. Causes, development and effects of pathological conditions contributing to temporary or chronic hearing impairments.
1 The relationship between plant structure and function and how the environment influences changes in the physiology to control higher plant growth and development are studied.
1 A study of the principles and practices used in the production of horticultural crops. Management of soils and soilless media, vegetative and reproductive growth and development, pests, harvest, post-harvest environment and marketing will be presented for model commodities.
1 An overview of the history, genetics, and reproductive mechanisms for agronomic and horticultural plants that examines mechanisms of genetic improvement ranging from traditional plant breeding to tissue culture and genetic engineering. Social and political issues such as germplasm preservation and international intellectual property rights will also be discussed.
1 A comprehensive course that teaches the fundamentals of agricultural related mechanics. Lecture and lab exercises will cover the broad range of topics associated with agricultural mechanics including electricity, plumbing, welding processes, and wood and metal working applications. Emphasis will be given to the design and installation of electrical circuits. It will also include project planning and implementation including development of safety protocols for each area of study and introduction of GPS equipment and software for survey data collection.
1 Students will learn to identify and understand relationships among major plant families of northeastern North America, especially of the Mid-Atlantic region, through lecture, field, and laboratory study. Characteristics and biogeography of and evolutionary relationships among families are emphasized in lecture. These characteristics will be woven together to provide understanding of the ecological and evolutionary drivers of plant diversity and the history of the field. Sight identification of families, genera, and species and keying skills are stressed in field and laboratory sessions.
1 An overview of U.S. and state water doctrines and plant water use rates. Irrigation systems for residential and athletic field use will be discussed covering such topics as hydraulics, sprinkler spacing, pipe selection and sizing, pumps, controllers, valves, and irrigation trouble shooting. Surface and subsurface drainage for turfgrass sites will also be covered.
1 Herbaceous plants are integral components of residential and commercial landscapes. Students will become familiar with 250 annual and perennial plants. The emphasis will be on plant management requirements and seasonal variation in the landscape.
1 A field and laboratory study of trees, shrubs, and vines used in ornamental plantings. Major emphasis is placed on native deciduous plant materials.
1 A field and laboratory study of trees, shrubs, and vines used in ornamental plantings. Major emphasis is placed on introduced and evergreen plant materials.
1 Principles of landscape architecture applied to residential and commercial landscaping: informal and formal designs and plan graphics.
1 A study of the principles and practices in the propagation of plants.
1 The establishment and maintenance of healthy trees in an urban setting will be studied. Lectures will focus on the environmental constraints to tree development in the city, and the role of physiological processes in regulating tree vigor. Laboratory exercises will cover the unique aspects of urban soils, tree valuation procedures, pruning and training, and supervised climbing.
1 An in-depth discussion of chemistry targeted to students enrolled in plant and animal management curricula offered in AGNR. Covers the nomenclature and basic functional groups in organic chemistry, secondary plant metabolites, basic tenets of organic agriculture and the creation of genetically-modified plants. The chemistry, handling and usage of agricultural pesticides is also discussed.
1 An introduction to the biological dimension of world hunger. The problems and potentials for increasing world food supply based on current agronomic knowledge. Emphasis on international aspects of food crop production and the interrelationships between agriculture and human populations in the developing world.
1 Identification and uses of turfgrass species; turfgrass fertilization, cultivation, mowing and establishment; and the identification of turf pests.
1 An examination of the use, properties, and detailing of materials used in landscape construction. The use and design of structures in the landscape.
1 Commercial management practices associated with the landscape build/design and maintenance industry are emphasized. Lectures focus on strategic planning, job cost management, bidding and estimating, marketing, and personnel management. Laboratories and field trips familiarize students with the landscape industry by interfacing with corporations and industry-related term projects.
